
REQUIREMENTS:

Create a password strength widget that could be used in multiple forms. The widget should do the following:
(1) Follow best practices for determining password strength.
(2) Allow any number of strength ranges (ex. "weak", "good", "excellent", etc...) to be defined for each password field.
(3) Be independant of page's HTML structure so the functionality can be used for any number of different login forms.

DISCUSSION:

The definitive research on calculating password strength has been conducted by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and documented in their "Electronic Authentication Guideline" (http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-63-1/SP-800-63-1.pdf). The NISTs recomendations for password strength calculations are located in Appendix A of the aforementioned document. The NIST defines a password's strenght in terms of "entrophy". Entrophy is simply how random the characters in the password are. A password composed of more random characters will have a higher entrophy value. For requirement #1 I used the entrophy calculations defined in the Electronic Authentication Guideline for determining a password's entrophy.

 The Electronic Authentication Guideline provides a detailed description of how to calculate entrophy, but for the sake of brevity, here an over-simplified explanation on how it works:

    (1) Determine how many character sets the password is in. For example "test1234-=" contains characters from three character sets: lowercase characters ("test"), numeric ("1234"), and special characters ("-=").
    (2) Calculate initial entrophy value based on size of the character sets the password is in, the number of character sets the password is in, and the length of password.
    (3) Add bonus entrophy for passwords that pass a dictionary test.

How much entrophy does a "strong" or "weak" password have? That answer is completely subjective. For that reason, and to fulfill requirement #2, the password strenght meter accepts a range of entrophy values to define what constitutes weak or strong passwords. There is no restriction on how many entrophy ranges can be specified.




